RFC: let-expression (#3159)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-let-expression.md

```rust
// simple let else
let Some(x) = y else {
    return Err("fail");
};

// with let expression
(let Some(x) = y) || {
    return Err("fail");
};

// or even better
(let Some(x) = y) || return Err("fail");

// let else else future possiblity
let Some(x) = a else b else c else { return; };

// with let expression
(let Some(x) = a) || (let Some(x) = b) || (let Foo(x) = bar) || { return; };
```

### New constructs

```rust
// reuse if let body
if let Some(x) = a || let Some(x) = b || Ok(x) = c {
    // body with many lines of code
} else {
    // else with many lines of code
}

// today alternative without code duplication:
if let ((Some(x), _, _) | (_, Some(x), _) | (_, _, Ok(x)) = (a, b, c) {

// assignment with default
(let Foo(x) = a) || (let Bar(x) = b) || (let x = default);

// today alternative:
let x = if let Foo(x) = a { x } else if let Bar(x) = b { x } else { default };

// simple let expression
assert!((let Some(x) = a) && (let Some(y) = b(x)) && x == y);

// today alternative with if let chains:
assert!(matches!(a, Some(x) if let Some(y) = b(x) && x == y));
assert!(if let Some(x) = a && let Some(y) = b(x) && x == y { true } else { false });
```

## Why now?

> This RFC exists thanks to people who choose `if let` for syntax we know today. If those

Reviewer: This section feels way too aggressive towards the people that originally introduced the if let syntax. The syntax wasn't picked randomly and there's an RFC that explains it https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/0160-if-let.html . It was inspired by a similar syntax in swift. It's fine to not like the decision, but it's certainly not a random decision. 

I'd also suggest using a less graphic analogy to say that this RFC would not have been necessary.

Author: This RFC is pro `if let` and I like this syntax. Random isn't used as a negatively charged word, and from it I meant there were other valid choices, but they choose `if let` for some good reasons other than a future let expression RFC, so relatively random, to this RFC. If the text does not convey this, help me change it and use a better word instead of random.

Author: I tried to address your comment in [this commit](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3159/commits/c2bdecdf938151c27abc0f8cc396141215963fba).

Reviewer: Here's what I would suggest. I still feel that the tone is a bit too opinionated, especially the last sentence, but I tried to keep it anyway.

```
This RFC exists because of the `if let` syntax we know today.
That syntax wasn't the only choice and there was other options like `iflet`, `if match`, `let if`, `if is` or another `keyword`. 
If one of those had been picked this RFC would not have been necessary or would have been very different.
If the `&&` or `,` symbol is used for the `if let chain` RFC, this RFC would not be necessary since it would not be compatible.

But luck is not always with us. We can't expect each new RFC to add another piece of the let expression puzzle to the language. For example, `matches!` and `let-else` are potentially not compatible with this RFC, `matches!` can [coexist with let expression][future-of-matches] but let-else is not compatible with let expression and therefore can't coexist. Some people have felt that `let-else` is not compatible with `if let chain`, this is one of the unresolved questions. The answer to this question is: they are not compatible! This RFC has less additions to the language grammar and is more expressive.

The goal of proposing this now is to prevent `let-else` and future similar RFCs to be stabilized. Originally, authors of the `if let chain` RFC had an incremental plan toward let expression.
The implementation of the first part took a long time and is still not done. Since the `if let chain` RFC is still not completed we see RFCs like `let-else` that tries to fix the missing parts of the `if let chain` RFC.

Even if it doesn't fit in this year road-map, we should decide if we want it or not today. Even today
is too late!
```

Reviewer: @HKalbasi not sure if you've seen this since it was posted in a resolved section

Author: @IceSentry I didn't see, and even when you mentioned me I was seeing a notification from nowhere :)

Thanks for suggestion, I updated this section with your text as base. Is it now good?

- Feature Name: let_expression
- Start Date: 2021-08-08
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Convert `let <pat> = <expr>` from a statement to an expression of type `bool`. Make
the language more consistent and remove corners by generalizing, plus adding
a bunch of magic constructs that are useful. After this RFC, you'll be able to write, among many other things:

```rust
// generalized matches! macro:
assert!((let Some(x) = y) && x > 2);

// generalized let-else construct
(let Some(a) = b) && (let Some(c) = f(&a)) || {
    return Err("failed");
};
println!("{}, {}", a, c);

// generalized assignment with default
(let Some(x) = y) || (let Foo(x) = bar) || (let x = default);
println!("{}", x);
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The main motivation for this RFC is improving consistency and ergonomics of language.

## Consistency

Currently we have `if`, `if let` and `if let && let` and we teach them as three different

> constructs (plus `let else` in future). But if we make `let` a `bool` expression, all will become the same and it would be

Author: The reasoning here is, new learners when see `if let`, expect that `let` should behave like a bool expression (like anything else inside `if` scrutinee) and this confusion will grow if we chain them with `&&` in if-let-chain and `||` in let-else. By making them an actual `bool` expression, there will be more things to learn (about PB and NB), but there would be no surprise for how `let` statement jumped into `if` and `&&` because it is a `bool` expression.

> constructs (plus `let else` in future). But if we make `let` a `bool` expression, all will become the same and it would be

Reviewer 2: Do new learners actually expect `let` to be a bool expression? The issue you linked in the RFC did not have any mention of bools. And new learners will get confused by the concepts of PBs and NBs too. You clearly have a bias towards if-let-chain and let-else because you describe their syntax as confusing, but as "more things to learn" when you talk about your RFC.

> constructs (plus `let else` in future). But if we make `let` a `bool` expression, all will become the same and it would be

Reviewer 3: Yah, the linked issue was renamed and labeled as a bug in error reporting, the error wasn't helpful to the end user and had nothing really to do with booleans at all

easier for new learners to get it. After this RFC you get only an unused parenthesis warning

> for `if (let Some(x) = y) { }`, not a hard error. And it will have the same behavior with

Author: I don't think `matches!` is bad, `matches!` and let expressions can coexist like `match` and `if let`. I prefer `matches!(foo, 'A'..'Z')` over `let 'A'..'Z' = foo`, but I think let expression as bool has its own use-cases, for example I think `let Some(x) = foo && 2 < x && x < 5` is more clear than `matches!(foo, Some(x) if 2 < x && x < 5)`

And I didn't get what is not true/good and how `matches!` is related to text you mentioned.

classic `if let`. This is actually [a mistake by a new learner](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/82827)
that show us new learners expect it.

This situation is worse with `if let chain` that mix let expressions with `&&` and
other bools. In fact the compiler will understand it via interpreting let as an
expression, so why we force humans to understand it another way?

This proposal is also in-line with "everything is an expression" that we have
in rust.

## Ergonomics

It also available many super powers for us that can
help decreasing rightward drift without adding to implementation and understanding complexity, and
actually decreasing it by removing `let-else` and preventing from future similar constructs.

### Compare to `let-else`

```rust
// simple let else
let Some(x) = y else {
    return Err("fail");
};

// with let expression
(let Some(x) = y) || {
    return Err("fail");
};

// or even better
(let Some(x) = y) || return Err("fail");

// let else else future possiblity
let Some(x) = a else b else c else { return; };

// with let expression
(let Some(x) = a) || (let Some(x) = b) || (let Foo(x) = bar) || { return; };

> ```

Author: Compiler won't accept your code as-is, by rules of bindings. But I added your concern with a weaker example here: https://github.com/HKalbasi/rfcs/blob/master/text/0000-let-expression.md#hard-to-read-let-expressions

> ```

Reviewer 2: That counterargument is pretty weak to me. The second example with "complexity in patterns" is definitely less complex. At least I know the names of variables that are bound immediately by just looking at the first line of `let ...`, and I know *exactly* where each pattern matches on each expression.

> ```

Author: Yes it is less complex, but it is also doing less work. And my point is this complexity can be scaled to infinity and you can write a 10 lines, confusing pattern.

> At least I know the names of variables that are bound immediately by just looking at the first line of let ...

It is valid, but discovering which variable is bound isn't hard at all. In fact, all bindings in top-level of expression will be bound. In my example, they are `x` and `y` and `a`. In your example, also `result` and `either` are in top level, but your example doesn't compile.

> I know exactly where each pattern matches on each expression.

Things won't be that easy if I add another `|` in pattern:

```rust
let (
  ((Foo(x), Some(y), (Some(a), _, _) | (_, Ok(a), _) | (_, _, Some(a)), _)
| (_, (Bar(y) | Foo(y), Bar(a), (Some(x), _, _) | (_, Err(x), _) | (_, _, Some(x)))
```

And in let expression we see which expression is in front of which pattern and this help readability. (Maybe I didn't understand your point, if it is the case an example can help)

My argument is "patterns can similarly and equally make infinitely complex examples", maybe I should change RFC text with better examples.

// today alternative with if let chains:
assert!(matches!(a, Some(x) if let Some(y) = b(x) && x == y));
assert!(if let Some(x) = a && let Some(y) = b(x) && x == y { true } else { false });
```

## Why now?
This RFC exists thanks to people who choose `if let` for syntax we know today.
That syntax wasn't the only choice and there was other options like `iflet`, `if match`, `let if`, `if is` or another `keyword`. 
If they chose one of the alternatives, no one would have even imagined the let expressions in form of this RFC
and this RFC either did not come into being at all or came in a completely different
form and with different capabilities.
But they chosen `if let` among other options (with good reasons) and we are here. Similarly people
who choose `&&` for `if let chain` could kill this. They didn't choose `&&` as randomly as
choosing `if let` and had let expression in their mind, but they had other options like `,` on
the table, which wasn't compatible with let expressions.

But luck is not always with us. We can't expect each new RFC to randomly add another
piece of the let expression puzzle to the language. For example `matches!` and `let-else` are

> against this and `let-else` is the possible killer for this RFC. Fortunately, people have

Reviewer 2: Your RFC seems to be very against `let-else`, but I can't find any strong arguments in this RFC about why this is better than `let-else`. If your goal is to oppose `let-else` then where is the argument that says *this syntax is superior over `let-else`*?

Author: Added: https://github.com/HKalbasi/rfcs/blob/master/text/0000-let-expression.md#let-else-rfc

- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Convert `let <pat> = <expr>` from a statement to an expression of type `bool`. Make
the language more consistent and remove corners by generalizing, plus adding
a bunch of magic constructs that are useful. After this RFC, you'll be able to write, among many other things:

```rust
// generalized matches! macro:
assert!((let Some(x) = y) && x > 2);

// generalized let-else construct
(let Some(a) = b) && (let Some(c) = f(&a)) || {
    return Err("failed");
};
println!("{}, {}", a, c);

// generalized assignment with default
(let Some(x) = y) || (let Foo(x) = bar) || (let x = default);
println!("{}", x);
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The main motivation for this RFC is improving consistency and ergonomics of language.

## Consistency

Currently we have `if`, `if let` and `if let && let` and we teach them as three different
constructs (plus `let else` in future). But if we make `let` a `bool` expression, all will become the same and it would be
easier for new learners to get it. After this RFC you get only an unused parenthesis warning

> for `if (let Some(x) = y) { }`, not a hard error. And it will have the same behavior with

Reviewer 4: I think that it's worth adding a helpful error message for this even if the RFC is not accepted. We could even consider making the compiler recover, but with a warning, though I'm not sure that's the way to go. I haven't checked what error message is given currently though.

Author: I think recovering with a warning is good, especially in if-let-chains because people may want to sure that `&&` isn't interpreted wrong so add a (unnecessary) parenthesis. But it will make demand for let expression even more, because users will say: What is this `let` that I can put it in `if` with parenthesis and `&&` it inside if, but nothing else?

        if let ExprKind::Assign(lhs0, rhs0, _) = first.kind;
        if let ExprKind::Assign(lhs1, rhs1, _) = second.kind;
        if eq_expr_value(cx, lhs0, rhs1);
        if eq_expr_value(cx, lhs1, rhs0);
        then {
            // 30 lines of code with massive rightward drift
        }
    }
}
```

Which by a generalized let-else can become:
```rust
for w in block.stmts.windows(2) {
    let StmtKind::Semi(first) = w[0].kind
    && let StmtKind::Semi(second) = w[1].kind
    && !differing_macro_contexts(first.span, second.span)
    && let ExprKind::Assign(lhs0, rhs0, _) = first.kind
    && let ExprKind::Assign(lhs1, rhs1, _) = second.kind
    && eq_expr_value(cx, lhs0, rhs1)
    && eq_expr_value(cx, lhs1, rhs0)
    || continue;
    // 30 lines of code with two less tab
}
```
Every `if let` or `if_chain!` that fill body of a loop or function can refactored in this way. You can easily find
dozens of them just in rust-clippy. Note that if-let-chain alone can't solve this problem, because you have access to
variables of if-let inside of block, but you have access to variables of a binding statement under it, thus you can

> save one indentation.

Reviewer 2: That is not a strong argument to me. I don't see the value in saving just one indentation. It might just make the code look more confusing.

Author: Saving one indentation is the propose of let-else and I assume let-else has value. And this pattern can also become useful in reusing else block in consecutive let-else (I added some text about this). Similar can be added to current let-else RFC in syntax like `let pat = expr, let pat = expr, let pat = expr else { }`. Do you find this syntax (and let-else in general) also confusing?

Reviewer 5: I find let-else to be a specific contained construct, simplifying a very common code pattern (match this pattern or bail out if it doesn't match).

Similarly, I find if-let chaining to be a specific contained construct, matching several things in a row without nesting, simplifying a common pattern.

This, on the other hand, feels like the wrong side of the tradeoffs between expressiveness and readability, and I think it's a rare example of language orthogonality taken too far. Normally, I'm very much in favor of orthogonality, and of general constructs that cover many different cases with the same mechanism. However, I don't think let matching should be a general boolean construct like this. I think the kind of code enabled by this that *isn't* enabled by let-else or if-let chaining is not code we *want* to enable. Every example of it in this RFC seems less readable than the equivalent way of expressing it without this construct.

```rust
let nread = if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<ChildStdoutResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<ChildStderrResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<TcpStreamResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<TlsStreamResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<UnixStreamResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<StdFileResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else {
    return Err(not_supported());
};
```
Which by `||` counterpart of if-let-chain can become:
```rust
let nread = if let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<ChildStdoutResource>()
    || let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<ChildStderrResource>()
    || let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<TcpStreamResource>()
    || let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<TlsStreamResource>()
    || let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<UnixStreamResource>()
    || let Some(s) = resource.downcast_rc::<StdFileResource>() {
    s.read(buf).await?
} else {
    return Err(not_supported());

> };

Reviewer 2: That is not possible, because those are different types. It could be done with trait objects but would be worse than the original code.

Author: Ah, good catch!

```
This is smaller and doesn't repeat a code.

A different class of practical usages of this RFC is let expression usage as a bool. People
wrap their let expressions with `if expr { true } else { false }` manually. This need is almost met
with `matches!` macro, but `if let true else false` is still a thing in rust code bases. Again from rust-clippy:
```rust
fn is_repeat_zero(&self, expr: &Expr<'_>) -> bool {
    if_chain! {
        if let ExprKind::Call(fn_expr, [repeat_arg]) = expr.kind;
        if is_expr_path_def_path(self.cx, fn_expr, &paths::ITER_REPEAT);
        if let ExprKind::Lit(ref lit) = repeat_arg.kind;
        if let LitKind::Int(0, _) = lit.node;

        then {
            true
        } else {
            false
        }
    }
}
```
After this RFC, we can write this:
```rust
fn is_repeat_zero(&self, expr: &Expr<'_>) -> bool {
    let ExprKind::Call(fn_expr, [repeat_arg]) = expr.kind
    && is_expr_path_def_path(self.cx, fn_expr, &paths::ITER_REPEAT)
    && let ExprKind::Lit(ref lit) = repeat_arg.kind
    && matches!(lit.node, LitKind::Int(0, _)) // you can use let expression here as well
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Is this better just because it is shorter and without extra indentation?

You need strong arguments for why this should be a language feature.

Author: Indentation isn't important here, point is `if` with branches equal to `true` or `false` are often reinventing bool operations (`if b { true } else { false }` is reinvention of nothing operation) and those operations read better than their `if` equivalent (I added a better example).

> You need strong arguments for why this should be a language feature.

Arguments are together strong. This is not the only argument for this RFC.

Some people may argue that current state is more readable, but [this lint](https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-clippy/master/index.html#needless_bool)

> is not agree with them.

Reviewer 2: Umm, that lint only looks for `if <expr> { <bool> } else { <bool> }` so it has nothing to do with `if let`.

Author: If let expressions become a thing, it would. Certainly it can't suggest let expressions today. There is a lint for `if let pat = expr { true } else { false }` that suggests `matches!(expr, pat)` which is equivalent to suggesting this lint for let expressions. Also I added another example in this category.

## Why now?
This RFC exists thanks to people who choose `if let` for syntax we know today.
That syntax wasn't the only choice and there was other options like `iflet`, `if match`, `let if`, `if is` or another `keyword`. 
If they chose one of the alternatives, no one would have even imagined the let expressions in form of this RFC
and this RFC either did not come into being at all or came in a completely different
form and with different capabilities.

> But they chosen `if let` among other options (with good reasons) and we are here. Similarly people

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But they chose `if let` among other options (with good reasons) and we are here. Similarly people
```

but `is_prime(x) else { continue };` isn't and won't be valid syntax in rust. So this RFC need much less changes
in the language.

For consistency with bool expressions, we should allow something like `let Some(x) = y || panic!("fail")`. For
normal bools it is considered a bad practice, (though [not everyone is agree](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/69466#issuecomment-591097014)
with it) and explicit `if` is preferred. In let expressions, explicit `if` is not an option due to difference in bindings,
and demand for such construct is real (The presence of let-else is a sign of this), so why we should consider a
pattern that exists in current rust and many other languages a bad practice, and then invent a new construct
that do exactly the same work and read almost the same (let-else vs let-orelse) and consider it a good practice?

## A subset of this RFC
Not all things introduced here are useful and some of them are because consistency and completeness. We can make
some subsets of this RFC hard errors and make them future possiblity. Subsets that are candidate of removing
are:
* The `!` operator:

> we can remove `!` operator so there would be no NB and whole thing becomes simpler to understand. But there may

Reviewer 6: Let's expand this acronym, because it's not obvious from context
```suggestion
we can remove `!` operator so there would be no negative bindings, and whole thing becomes simpler to understand. But there may
```

Author: Ah, I missed it, whole part need to be removed. In old (!) days, NB was a thing :) Thanks.

Can become useful. In this section there are some usages for new features of this RFC in real codes.

This is an example from rust-clippy repository:
```rust
for w in block.stmts.windows(2) {
    if_chain! {
        if let StmtKind::Semi(first) = w[0].kind;
        if let StmtKind::Semi(second) = w[1].kind;
        if !differing_macro_contexts(first.span, second.span);
        if let ExprKind::Assign(lhs0, rhs0, _) = first.kind;
        if let ExprKind::Assign(lhs1, rhs1, _) = second.kind;
        if eq_expr_value(cx, lhs0, rhs1);
        if eq_expr_value(cx, lhs1, rhs0);
        then {
            // 30 lines of code with massive rightward drift
        }
    }
}
```

Which by a generalized let-else can become:
```rust
for w in block.stmts.windows(2) {
    (let StmtKind::Semi(first) = w[0].kind)
    && (let StmtKind::Semi(second) = w[1].kind)
    && !differing_macro_contexts(first.span, second.span)
    && (let ExprKind::Assign(lhs0, rhs0, _) = first.kind)
    && (let ExprKind::Assign(lhs1, rhs1, _) = second.kind)
    && eq_expr_value(cx, lhs0, rhs1)
    && eq_expr_value(cx, lhs1, rhs0)
    || continue;

>     // 30 lines of code with two less tab

Reviewer 7: this is more like a practical example of the *existing* `if_let_chain` feature

```rust
    if let StmtKind::Semi(first) = w[0].kind 
        && let StmtKind::Semi(second) = w[1].kind
        && !differing_macro_contexts(first.span, second.span)
        ...
        && eq_expr_value(cx, lhs1, rhs0)
    {
        continue;
    }
```

this is also more consistent with the way people would write

```rust
if next_condition {
    continue;
}
```

rather than

```
next_condition || continue;
```

Author: if-let-chain still need one indentation, because variables are bound inside of if body (like if-let) but in the example with `||` variables are bound after statement (like let-else). If you believe if-let can't meet the needs that let-else provide, The same statement is true for if-let-chain and this RFC.

> this is also more consistent with the way people would write

I am agree and prefer explicit `if` over `||` in normal cases. Without bindings, both behavior is the same (both in current rust and in this RFC) but because binding rules for them are different (for good reasons; for example accessing if-let variables after body is surprising) you can save one indentation by `||` one.

And it is worth noting that `!next_condition || continue;` is completely valid and working in today rust. But `!next_condition else { continue };` isn't and won't, so let-else syntax has a negative point here and this RFC is more consistent with rust.
